almost as you get fatigued by like
towards 4 p.m 6 p.m 7 p.m it becomes
like easier for you to start studying
and then you stay up all night you pound
caffeine and then you kind of get into
what i would call like the fatigue
groove for lack of a better term okay so
we're gonna talk a little bit about why
is it that
you get a ton of motivation when you're
going to bed at night
um
and
why when you wake up in the morning like
you don't actually do anything okay
so a couple of different dimensions that
we're going to talk about
one is like so our question is why do we
get motivated at night but like not
during the day so we're going to start
by understanding some stuff about
neuroscience we're going to talk about
one aspect of psychology and then we're
just going to talk about a couple of
general principles this is almost more
spiritual
about clarity of mind and like where
motivation comes from and we're going to
talk about behavioral calculations as
well okay
so the first thing to understand i'm
going to tell you guys about an
experiment okay
so they took a bunch of mice
and
what they were doing is trying to assess
there's a part of our brain called the
nucleus accumbens
and the nucleus accumbens is the part of
our brain that actually manages
reward and behavior okay so it's a very
dopamine it's like a very like it's one
of the dopamine circuits in the brain so
a lot of times people are talking about
dopamine dopamine dopamine like dopamine
is the reason that like i get addicted
to video games i need to detox off of
dopamine i'm in dopamine exhaustion we
talk about dopamine everyone talks about
dopamine dopamine
so in the nucleus accumbens there's
dopamine
but the interesting thing is that
all of this stuff has been
oversimplified so i'm going to add some
complexity to it but even i'm going to
be oversimplifying
so they took a group of mice and they
basically did a really interesting
experiment where they injected different
stuff into the nucleus accumbens of mice
so generally speaking they took mice and
they gave them two options of food
one is like a high carbohydrate super
tasty like twinkie pellet it's basically
like a pellet that's like a twinkie and
the other is like a regular food and
they normally have to work a little bit
harder they have to like press a lever
to get like the twinkie versus like the
kale salad okay
so generally speaking when you give mice
this choice what'll happen is they'll
like they'll go for the twinkie they'll
go for the high carbohydrate nutrient
dense food and they'll eat it and
they'll be happy little mice fat little
mice too
so what some researchers did is they
uh
injected
a certain amount of dopamine blocker
into the brains of these mice okay so
we're gonna kind of go back to this for
a second
and let's see what happened
so
i'm gonna have to figure out how to draw
this so let's say you've got a mouse
and then the default
is high energy pellet
and then the other option is low energy
pellet
so normally
in the situation
that
our normal situation let's call it blue
so normally a mice goes a mouse goes
this way they they choose the high
dopamine pellet okay
so then what what researchers did is
they they blocked dopamine in the
nucleus accumbens
so in the nucleus accumbens of mice
they took a
dopamine blocker
and they blocked dopamine and what they
actually found when you block the action
of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens is
that mice will actually go this way
okay so if we blocked opening that's
because these are a little bit harder to
get the other way you can kind of think
about it is that they have no preference
for the high energy pellet over the low
energy pellet
and then they did something really
interesting
they took a third chemical
adenosine
and they actually blocked
the action of adenosine
in the nucleus accumbens and what they
found is that the mouse went back to the
high energy palette
okay
so now we're going to talk a little bit
because like you know neuroscience is
complicated but you know most people
talk about dopamine don't talk about in
a complicated sense so there's three
states that we can kind of think of
in terms of dopamine and adenosine
okay
so let's just talk actually for a second
about what adenosine is adenosine is
essentially a waste product in the brain
so we have a um
we have this like the the fuel of our
brain is something called atp
and the waste product after we burn a
molecule of atp is to wind up with
adenosine and we know we don't really i
mean adenosine does all kinds of stuff
so i'm oversimplifying things but the
other thing that we know is as you as
the day goes on so like if we think
about um you know
time of the day
in adenosine
okay
what happens over time
as we go throughout our day is adenosine
slowly climbs
and then we go to sleep
and then what our brain does is clear
adenosine from the brain
and then this is waking up
so as the day goes on
we increase in our adenosine so what i
would kind of say and if we kind of
think about dopamine for a second okay
so when you wake up first thing in the
morning and you feel really excited to
play a game
so let's say this is dopamine
and let's say this is time i'm super
excited to play a game i really want to
play dota there's a new patch the first
game of dota i play gives me a lot of
dopamine right this is an
oversimplification but dopamine signal
is a better way to put it and then the
more games of dota i play essentially my
dopamine starts to go down
so this is why when you kind of look at
like behavioral reinforcement
right so this is why people will say
like at the beginning of the day like
that's when you like if you're
productive at the beginning you're going
to have a good day whereas if you start
playing video games like it's a lot
easier to do work for two hours and then
start gaming than it is to play for two
hours stop and then start doing work
so our dopamine generally speaking like
we get more bored of crap by the end of
the day we're excited to do things but
by like 7 p.m 8 p.m you're like eh if
you've been playing games all day you
don't really feel like doing much right
and then we go to sleep over here
and then we kind of wind up
back here when we wake up if we're lucky
so if we kind of look at it there are
kind of three states of dopamine and
adenosine throughout the day and
remember this is a waste product right
so we can have high dopamine and low
adenosine so this is in the am
we can have
low dopamine and low adenosine we'll get
to this state in a second or what we can
have is low dopamine and high adenosine
okay
and so if we kind of think about it
when we block
so this is a state where when we block
dopamine
and we still have adenosine remember we
end up going for the low energy pellet
right so when we block
adenosine as well
then we end up either going for both are
we going for end up going for the high
energy pellet so you can almost think
about adenosine and dopamine as having
antagonistic properties
so adenosine will blunt the effect of
dopamine okay so what is the dopamine
counter it is adenosine
okay
is the dopamine counter
so you guys may wonder a little bit
about this
and why this actually works
so like let me give you guys kind of
like an example
so if you guys ever like
studied like let's say you've got a
final the next day right what time do
you usually start studying
if you're like me you don't start
studying first thing in the morning for
the final the next day you procrastinate
until 2 pm 4 pm you're like
around you're like i should study i
should study i shouldn't study and then
once oh gg
once uh 6 pm rolls around you're kind of
like
once 6 pm rolls around you're kind of um
you kind of like oh man like
like it's somehow like easy like as as
time goes on you get like a little bit
less distracted
and like then suddenly it's like easy
for you to study right in the morning
it's actually like super hard for you to
study but almost as you get fatigued by
like towards 4 p.m 6 p.m 7 p.m it
becomes like easier for you to start
studying and then you stay up all night
you pound caffeine and then you kind of
get into what i would call like the
fatigue groove for lack of a better term
okay
so like the fatigue groove is like when
you're actually like really functional
but you're kind of tired and in a weird
way you can get into this fatigue group
easier than you can like at the start of
the day when it's so easy to get
distracted does that sort of make sense
it's almost like games are more tempting
at like
noon than they are at like 6 p.m or 7
p.m and then like you kind of get tired
and then it's sort of like you get into
this weird fatigue groove and what i'd
call that fatigue groove is essentially
this this adenosine buildup throughout
the day so as like our day goes goes on
and we kind of think about it this way
so like
let's call dopamine green okay
so dopamine kind of starts out high easy
to get distracted video games and then
let's call adenosine yellow
and then like you kind of start
adenosine over here and then like this
is sort of like
6 p.m and this is when you start
studying and then you pull you study all
night you're kind of fatigued and then
like with 7 a.m rolls around your exam
is in an hour and then you kick yourself
right you're like man if i had started
like four hours earlier six hours
earlier if i only started studying a
little bit earlier i could have gotten
so much more but it was so hard to study
so much earlier and i think part of that
is adenosine
so it's interesting because what you
know our ability to get distracted by
stuff
oh sh i'm sorry i couldn't see this this
so this is dopamine this is adenosine
and then you know so you start out with
dopamine over here high and then over
time it it goes down and then with
adenosine let's call it yellow
and then it increases and then this is
kind of your 6 p.m switch where you
start studying okay and this is also
where like we can kind of think a little
bit about night owls right so there's
actually like there are a lot of
situations where we can see
people are actually more productive like
later in the day and that may have
something to do with like adenosine
production in the brain
and so then the question becomes like
what's the relationship between these
two things
and it's that when we're vulnerable to
our dopaminergic activities
early in the day like when you feel
excited to play games you kind of want
to watch stuff like it's really hard to
work and then once you kind of get into
this like fatigue groove in the middle
of the day the dopaminergic pull
decreases on its own and then like
adenosine because remember adenosine has
a blunting effect on dopamine right
that's what the key thing about this rat
study
is that it demonstrated how dope
adenosine is the dopamine counter so
adenosine is a waste product in the
brain and that sort of makes sense too
because the more that our brain does
things
the more energy it uses up and the more
energy it uses up the more tired it
feels and the less it feels like doing
things
so since adenosine is the dopamine
counter as the day goes on it blunts our
ability to like respond to dopamine or
be controlled by dopamine and then we
can start studying it like 6 pm after
procrastinating all day okay so that's
the first thing
so
the first reason why i think you can
sometimes get motivated is because your
motivation gets distracted by
dopaminergic activities early in the day
and then as you start to get fatigued
like you don't feel like you know the
dopaminergic pull isn't there you're not
thinking about playing games anymore
you're not like oh i really want to do
this so this would be kind of fun and so
as you're as all of the the desires and
the dopaminergic controls starts to fade
into the background because of elevated
levels of adenosine then like the deeper
motivation can start to shine forth
because it's not just this dopaminergic
crap anymore does that make sense
so that's one thing that has to do with
neuroscience so let now let's talk a
little bit about future discounting
so
if we talk about you know what the real
problem is
motivation is a feeling and it increases
at night right so motivation
increases at night
but now here's the question
does behavior increase at night
right so when you feel super motivated
at night do you
engage
in the behavior
interesting right
so when we when we kind of
when we go to bed at night there's a
really interesting thing about
motivation which is that there's no
cost motivation
so our motivation can like increase
unchecked it can spiral out of control
you're sitting there like late at night
and you're thinking like oh tomorrow i'm
gonna do this i'm gonna do this it's
gonna be great it's gonna be awesome
like i have all of this motivation and
in our brain there's no cost because
you're not giving anything up
you're not actually doing anything so
it's like your motivation can like rise
to epic proportions because there's no
cost to the motivation there's no
balance to the motivation
now when you wake up the next morning
what's the situation
the next am
now you have a choice
motivation
versus video game
so let's say that at night i think about
oh man i'm gonna write a novel
right so this is the other thing
creative stuff right happens a lot at
night i'm gonna write a novel so now i
have a choice i can write a novel
or i can play a video game
and now suddenly there's a cost to the
motivation
right so if i if i if i write a novel
for one hour have i written a novel no
have i written one percent of a novel no
there's no like cost benefit like
there's no like what have i done in an
hour so my brain is sitting there and
it's doing this kind of goes back to
this other calculation like the
behavioral calculation and my brain is
sitting there in the morning and it's
thinking like okay if i like can i write
a novel now no like can i write a novel
in an hour no can i write a novel in two
hours no can i write a novel in four
hours no
so can i actually write the novel in the
morning
no
now can i play a game in an hour
yup
can i get a little bit of that can i get
that dopamine can i get me a little bit
that dopamine please
ma'am sir thank you yes please and thank
you yeah absolutely easy
easy so now when in the light of day
when you actually have the opportunity
to engage in the behavior
there's an opportunity cost now because
at night there's no opportunity cost
so your your your you know your
motivation can just fly through the roof
because it doesn't cost you anything
it's like free
like i can and then you get more
inspired you think about how great it's
gonna be i'm gonna have this idea i'm
gonna have that idea like this
character's gonna do this we're gonna do
plot twists here it's gonna be like no
one's gonna realize what's gonna happen
it's gonna get picked up there's gonna
be a bidding war between netflix and hbo
for my awesome new novel it's gonna be
great it's like twilight meets game of
thrones it's gonna be like the most epic
thing since harry potter it's gonna be
so awesome there's no cost to any of it
right and then come the light of day now
suddenly there's a cost like
twilight meets game of thrones holy crap
that's gonna take a lot of work like how
do i even do that they're gonna be
different vampire houses like what's up
with that how's that gonna work ah
it's overwhelming
i don't know how to start
so let me just play a video game at
least that's easy
easy easy let me just do this so in your
brain you have this behavioral
calculation we've talked about the doubt
march endowed paper a lot right so if
you guys remember that paper it's also
on our discord and things like that
there's a behavioral calculation that in
in the night doesn't it's like it's like
a
an equation that only has one side of
the equal sign so it can the motivation
goes out of control because there's no
cost but come the light of day now
suddenly there's a cost it's like you're
going to sleep at night and you're like
man i'm going to wake up tomorrow i'm
going to work out first thing
and then you wake up tomorrow and it's
like am i going to work out right now
because do you work out in the middle of
the night like when you feel so
motivated to write that novel do you
actually get up and write do you
actually work out no you don't do any of
those things when the cost actually
becomes part of the scale so we've got
you know a set of scales right
and then like the motivation is just you
know there's a ton of motivation over
here so it's easy because it's empty
so motivation easy but now we start
adding a cost during the day and then
suddenly this is gone and then our
motivation goes up or whatever you know
this wins
and then it's gg
okay
so next thing to consider so there's
like a future discounting problem
there's an opportunity cost problem uh
it's not really the future discounting
is another one of these principles where
like
um our brain chooses the reason i call
it future discounting is because our
brain chooses an immediate gain over an
uncertain long-term gain
so like i can get some immediate
satisfaction right now but come the
light of morning like i don't actually
know if anyone's ever going to bid war
over this because i've been writing for
an hour and it sucks there's no plot
twist like i can't
you know there's no
it's not successful
after one hour but if i play a game it's
like easy done
so now what i want to talk a little bit
about is almost
what i would call spiritual it's not
really spiritual but
it's not scientific and i think like the
yogic folks like understood this stuff
like a little bit better
and so what i'm going to talk about now
about why you know this is the third
reason
why motivation is higher at night is
shower thoughts
okay
so if you think about shower thoughts
like what's so interesting about the
shower like when you're in the shower
you're in this kind of like con state of
consciousness where you're not really
distracted you can't be on your phone
you can't really like do a whole lot
with your mind there's like no mental
distraction
and there's some amount of physical
roteness
right you're just like hopefully like
shampooing yourself cleaning your hair
things like that
and and then what happens is like this
combination of factors leads to profound
thinking
and now we all let now let's look at the
situation we go to bed so like you know
i i mean if you're on your bed you're
not gonna have i mean if you're on your
phone in bed you're not going to have
motivation you guys see that if you're
sitting there watching something or
browsing something you're not going to
feel an ounce of motivation it's when
you go to bed
it's when you put down your phone
there's nothing left to mentally
distract you so you're just sitting with
yourself
there isn't necessarily like a physical
roteness but there is sort of like a
physical
pull
or grounding let's say maybe that's a
better
feeling right and so we see a very
analogous situation to actually
showering
and then we result in like motivation
and thinking
right this is the situation in bed and
so the reason i call this kind of like
spiritual in nature is because i think
yoga like the yogis and stuff were the
ones that really looked at these
different states of mind and figured out
how do we cultivate this kind of state
of mind
and so what we can see is that a lot of
that motivation
naturally bubbles forth when we are free
from distraction
when we have no dopaminergic options at
hand and we are being with ourself
right so this is like a phrase that we
use where when you go for a walk
in nature
when you shower
when you lay in bed at night
and the interesting thing is that even
like technically someone else can be
there like you can lay in bed with your
partner or whatever but as long as you
guys aren't interacting the state will
come
so the reason i call it spiritual is
because it's about like this is the
angle where i think about cultivating a
particular state of consciousness
so if you want that kind of motivation
to hit you in other parts of the day we
already figured out showering
right so this one is like there's even
like shower thoughts is a thing
we see it when we go to bed at night but
you can actually cultivate these states
by walking in nature by
doing away with the dopaminergic
distractions right because at the end of
the day this is going to
increase dopamine
or like when you're on your phone it's
going to increase open when you play
video games it's going to increase
dopamine
and so this kind of goes back to like
this state over here
where these meditative practices
this is actually the ideal state so this
is why if you really look at people like
i for example do my most productive work
in the morning
where if i if i spend 15 minutes on my
phone at the beginning of my day if i
sit down at my computer my product
productivity is going to be like
at 80 percent of what it was sometimes
even less
the longer i spend at my computer first
thing in the morning the more screwed i
am for the day
whereas most of my like thinking
my high quality thinking happens before
i hop on the dopamine train
so avoid the dopamine train
okay takeaways number one avoid the
dopamine train number two
adenosine
gets you off
the dopamine train
so this is the fatigue groove
but
the problem with the fatigue groove is
that you're fatigued right it's not like
adenosine like adenosine is a waste
product so at this point like you're
fatigued so even though you can work
you're not as distracted the quality of
your work is going to be like 60 to 80
right and so number three
is like what you really want to
cultivate and this is like where kind of
meditation comes in is this state of
mind so this is the fatigue groove
this is when we get distracted
and then this state of mind with low
dopamine and low adenosine when your
mind is fresh where it's super capable
and at the same time it's not distracted
it's not being dopaminergic we're
creating space to be with ourselves
where we're not on our phones we don't
have mental distractions and often times
it can really help to have a physical
roteness or a grounding activity this is
why walking is really really healthy for
you or hiking right you can think a lot
or awesome really deep thoughts when
you're going for a hike if it's not
physically intensive to the point where
it's occupying your mind so if i'm rock
climbing for example like i'm not going
to be thinking deep philosophical
thoughts or creative thoughts because
all of my mental focus is going to be on
the actual physical activity but that's
the thing is that there are some
activities like showering or being in
bed or going for a walk that have a
certain physical grounding aspect
that don't demand your mental attention
so your mind can be free
and then you'll start to have motivation
questions
so what was number three oh yeah
seek out
you know
low dopamine
low adenosine states
and these states have these components
that we talked about over here right
which is
no dopamine
distractions
physical grounding
and what was this oh yeah
like mental space let's call it
and the other thing that you can do is
like this is what we call
being
with
yourself
and meditation helps a lot so like don't
start the first hour of the day like
don't use technology that's the biggest
thing you can do
questions
i personally prefer showering in the
morning but to each their own
oh my god so many questions hold on hold
on hold on
okay here's here's the
okay so big mouth fringe says what
should we do tldr
so here's the thing i can tell you what
to do but
you have to understand
right so here's something to unders
here's something to understand
behavioral change does not come with
information transmission
behavioral change comes from
understanding so we see this a lot in
addictions where like people say one day
they'll wake up and they'll say
enough is enough and if you ask them how
did you quit alcohol they just say i
woke up one day and i realized enough is
enough
now i could tell them every day before
that enough is enough you've got to stop
drinking and they're not going to do it
so the first thing you should do is
understand this the first thing that you
should do is study yourself
the first thing you should do is see if
what i'm saying is correct
do you find the fatigue groove what
happens first thing when you wake up in
the morning experiment first don't worry
about doing because who the hell knows
like this may not apply to you
experiment first understand first
explore first
see if you can find these three things
to cultivate this kind of like
motivational you know triad
of physical grounding but not physically
demanding stuff free of mental
distraction or mental space and to be
free of mental distractions
see what happens in your day when for
the first hour of the day you do not
touch a piece of technology
what happens in your mind what happens
to your motivation
right because at the end of the day if
you want to optimize performance
you don't need you don't want to use the
crutch of adenosine and the fatigue
groove to get stuff done that's what has
you operating at 70 percent
what are some good books to learn all
this stuff and also more heavily focused
on disorders there aren't unfortunately
there aren't really books
so that's why we built dr k's guide
because like what i'm offering you guys
is a synthesis of knowledge
i will link to you however two papers
which i think um for those of you who
are interested in adenosine so there are
a couple of references there
but this stuff i mean this is an
amalgamation of books right this is not
just books is the other thing is a lot
of what i teach is not books it's like
scientific papers
so you can you what you have to do is
like read a lot of scientific papers and
like stitch things together
and the part of the what we teach is
like you know you can get a phd in
neuroscience you'll learn a third of
this lecture you can get a phd in
psychology you'll learn a third of this
lecture you can spend five years
studying in india and you'll get a third
of this lecture
i don't mean i just genuinely don't have
like it's not like this is in one book
like the whole point is like this is an
amalgamation of knowledge
um what if my work is on technology then
don't work for the first week first hour
of the day i'm serious
just don't work for the first hour don't
do your job
right you can do your job later so spend
the first hour of the day cooking
cleaning
exercising straightening up your place
running an errand
you know
good questions
how do twitch streamers that are
addicted to video games become
successful then excellent question
because their success
is tied to the dopaminergic process
so this is a fantastic question right
so if your material success is tied to
the dopaminergic circuit in the nucleus
accumbens then you can be successful and
do this
easy
the challenge is that for most of us
the dopaminergic hit
does not lead to material success
so this is also where i mean they have
their fair amount of suffering too okay
so
but this is where if we look at like you
know part of the job of being a
successful twitch streamer is to spend
time on twitter
spend time on youtube spend time playing
games these are all dopaminergic
activities that's why there are
successful twitch streamers because the
world has evolved to a point where
dopaminergic activities can be
financially rewarded video games aren't
a distraction anymore they're now a job
and so what people have managed to do is
give in to their dopamine dopaminergic
circuits
they've become successful on twitch and
they're a mess
they suffer on the inside unless they
can learn how to set limits
right they like they like internally
like they're burnt out
because like they're just they're stuck
in the dopamine loops they don't feel
like they're in control of their life
all this kind of stuff
not even music in the morning i guess
you can listen to music
how do i reset the cycle from working
all night what i would say is that you
should try to stay up
and then like go to bed like at like 6
p.m or 7 p.m
so in my experience if you want to
reset your sleep schedule we've got a
video about this by the way
so if you look at the
human brain insomnia and circadian
rhythm
as a human being is it is easier to stay
up when you are tired than it is to go
to sleep when you are not
this is the key thing to understand
about resetting your sleep schedule
there's one thing to understand it's
that staying up is easier than going to
bed
so if my circadian rhythm is all off and
i lay down at 9 00 pm i may stay awake
for like four hours and then there's
like gg
nothing i can do about it
whereas it's way easier to stay up all
night right like it's it's easier to go
to stay awake 12 hours longer than when
you should go to bed than it is to go to
sleep 12 hours earlier than
you know you should go to sleep
so like it's really hard to wake up at 8
a.m and like go to sleep at 10 a.m
way easier to wake up at 8 a.m and stay
up
until 10 a.m the next day
i know i'm four pixels
trying to figure out why okay there
there we go
okay
so i would say try to stay up
until like you know 6 p.m or 7 p.m and
then you're gonna be so exhausted that
you should have no trouble falling
asleep or hopefully it'll be easier
and then what will happen is you'll
sleep for a long time and it'll be
easier to wake up in the morning so i'd
say like go to sleep at like 6 p.m 7 p.m
stay up for like 36 hours you have to be
careful about you know driving and stuff
i wouldn't drive or anything like that
so don't do anything that's dangerous
because you're gonna be heavily impaired
and then what you want to do is like set
an alarm for like 12 hours from you know
when you go to bed so like set an alarm
for like 6 a.m or 7 a.m you may feel
kind of groggy and weird when you wake
up
um
but then that'll be like the first step
in the right direction and then you have
to power through that day and then it'll
be easier to go to sleep at like 10 p.m
so that's how you fix it
someone's asking
how do i avoid the dopamine training in
the morning it's so hard yeah you're
absolutely right it is very hard
so i think the biggest problem with the
dopamine train is your phone
so really think about what is your phone
for right what is the function of your
phone why do we keep it with us we keep
it with us because of emergencies what
if there's an emergency but like the
likelihood of emergency is very very low
so what i'd recommend for people who are
trying to avoid the dopamine train in
the morning is just
keep the devices away from you
like make the burden of reaching your
device very hard don't sleep with your
phone in the same room
and it's like what if something happens
in the middle of the night and someone
calls me well then like
or if you want to i guess you can put it
at the other end of the room
and like keep it away from you so it's
not with you when you're going to bed at
night
and it's not like within arms reach when
you wake up in the morning
and the second thing is like just be
aware like as you wake up understand
what's happening like you want to go and
you sit down at your computer like
that's what you want to do with every
fiber of your being
you know it's like and be like what the
hell is that
let me see how long i can sit here
without going to the computer and watch
that struggle within yourself
it's going to be like this serpent like
uncoiling and like threatening you and
it's going gonna like pressure you so
much the pressure is crazy and then your
mind is gonna find this like internal
like weird you're gonna trick yourself
into thinking it's okay to do
you guys see what i'm saying like you're
gonna be like it's not that big of a
deal
your mind is gonna slippery like
twist this way and that to get you to
the computer
if you just say to yourself like i'm not
gonna use the computer for an hour your
mind will go into absolute rebellion
and it'll it'll push you it'll say
that's stupid
don't do it and when that doesn't work
it'll be like it's not that big of a
deal just do it it's like like you can
start tomorrow like whatever you watch
what your mind does it'll turn against
you
in every fiber of its being and that's
the dopamine craving it's like the
addict that's looking for something and
just be like what the
is this
it's crazy
then the other thing that you can do so
you can struggle there but you're gonna
fail if you struggle for too long i'd
say like you know brush your teeth take
a shower if you can whatever get dressed
then just leave the house without your
phone go for a walk in your neighborhood
get dressed and just walk around the
block 15 minutes 20 minutes
as you're walking around the block think
about okay i gotta make breakfast i'll
make coffee like whatever go back and
then like lay out a very simple plan
don't overshoot it right don't think
about all the things you have to do
today your goal is to make it to one
hour
you're gonna make your food you're gonna
have your coffee then you're going to
sit down and then then you pull out a
to-do list okay what am i going to do
over the next two hours don't make your
to-do list for the day you're screwed if
you make a to-do list for the day you're
screwed do you know why
because if it's too loose for the day
you don't have to start now
you can play games for a couple of hours
you can start like 2 p.m 4 p.m 6 pm
do this for the day
don't make it two deals for the day
just what am i gonna do this next hour
what is the next right step
this is a meditation practice that i do
myself so here's my meditation for the
day
it's gonna be kind of weird it's to ask
yourself what is the next best step
what is the next
best
step that's it
ask yourself this question again and
again and again
what is the next best step
and the reason i include next and best
is because
sometime i don't know if this kind of
makes sense
maybe actually what i say to myself what
is the next best thing i can do that's
the that's the practice i realized i
left a piece out what is the next best
thing i can do and the important thing
about that is it's not about what is
objectively best
it is about what is the next best thing
that i can do
so it acknowledges for a moment that you
don't have to be perfect it acknowledges
for a moment that you don't have to
start studying for your test right now
but if i can't start studying for my
tests can i toss in a load of laundry
can i do some laundry if i can't do
laundry can i go for a walk okay then
it's a second walk chat i cannot tell
you guys i will go for three walks
during the day and the reason i go for
three walks for during the day is
because unless i go for a walk i'm gonna
fall into gaming
but i can like physically i can force
myself
to walk 10 feet put on my shoes and walk
out the door and once i walk out the
door the desire to game disappears
you guys get that like
the key to
building a successful like
action throughout the day or habit is
not doing the whole action it's just
boarding the train to the easy part
because once it's i have never in my
life
taken two steps outside the door with my
shoes on being dressed turned around and
walked back in
in fact at that point it feels really
awkward and difficult to do that i don't
think i could do it
so sometimes what happens in our mind is
we think about
what goal we need to meet it's not about
the goal all you have to do is get far
enough to like let the train take you
the rest of the way you just have to
board the train
it's all about which train am i boarding
am i boarding the dota train or i'm
boarding the walk train
and then as you walk okay fine you
resisted for 15 minutes
20 minutes come back okay let's eat
something so you sit down it's just like
you know when you walk inside once again
it's like a battle of wills for like
five seconds do i go into like my my
room where the computer is or do i walk
into the kitchen that's all it takes if
i walk into the kitchen then it's easy i
boarded the kitchen train
right
and then in that way you will build up
like the life that you want like one
painstaking struggle at a time
some days you'll win some days you'll
lose and so it comes back to what is the
next best thing i can do i've played two
i've wasted two hours playing video
games
can i resist and can i actually get up
and go for a walk if you can't do it no
big deal
so this is your meditation what is the
next best thing i can do
what's next what do i need to do
anything any tiny thing that is the best
thing that i am capable of let me do
that thing
got it
do music or books help or hurt the
dopamine dopaminergic system generally
speaking i think they're like positive
because what they do is they get us away
from the things that are like super
toxic
right so like they get us away from
games and stuff
like so i think music can be very
inspiring like you can use your music
very judiciously so i tend to use music
very judiciously i don't have it on all
the time
i listen to music and i listen to it
intentionally because music can put you
in a particular mood
so before i stream like i oftentimes
listen to music to get in the right mood
i'll listen to some like pageants and
stuff too so like like devotional music
because that creates a certain move
sometimes i'll listen to kanye because
that creates a certain mood you can use
music to cultivate a particular mood
so go for a walk for 15 minutes and like
have like a you know a nice inspiring
playlist
and then like you'll get back and you'll
kind of do it
right
so for people who are saying
my work involves a computer so here's a
wild thing you can do this is tough
you can have a different computer for
your work in a different computer for
your gaming
okay
now even if you have one computer so
this is literally what i did so for
people who are struggling so if you're
like a programmer
and you find that like it's really hard
okay so let me let me think about how to
say this
so
a lot of taking control of your life and
doing the right things in the day is
avoiding getting on the dopamine
dopamine training right the second you
pick up your phone and you open up
twitter or something else you've lost 15
minutes you've lost an hour even you
browse and you browse and you browse and
then like the sun goes down it's a gg
the second you sit down on your computer
it's so easy to just open up a damn tab
and like all these browsers are getting
smart they know what you like to read so
the second you open up a tab one click
is all it takes and then like it shows
you stuff like your homepage even have
suggested readings for you right like
even phones nowadays have like this this
thing that you can't disable where if
you swipe in one direction it gives you
a feed and then it's gg
so if you if you're a programmer or
something your job is on your computer
how do you avoid
like falling into the trap of like the
dopamine or your crap how do you avoid
logging into steam or like you know
booting up this video game or like
pulling up youtube or whatever
and so the thing that i actually did so
like i would say you can have two
computers if you can financially like
afford that even when i was in medical
school i had one computer
but what i would what i did have is like
two desks or two spaces in my desks
so i had like two da it wasn't even like
a folding table
and like a crappy desk so you can
actually get that
and what i would literally do is pick up
my laptop and i had like my gaming
station and i had my like working
station so my working station was a
large desk where i had like books and
stuff like that i'd stick my laptop in
the back
and when i was ready to play games i
would literally pick up my laptop move
to the gaming station plug in a proper
mouse plug in my like head uh like
headphones or or speakers or whatever
and then i like game at that station and
it was it was like i'd slide my chair
over and even that can make a big
difference
so i think if your job involves your
computer as best as you can try to
separate the two so you can separate the
physical spaces so that is like an
important part of like habit and
environment you can also create
different logins
right you can have a professional login
and a work login because that also
centers your mind and sort of anchors
your mind in a particular mode you have
professional login and gaming login and
you don't log into your gaming login
until you're done with your work for the
day you like time things from like nine
to five there are these kinds of
behavioral anchors that you can actually
use that are the opposite of exactly
what these developers use to get you
hooked
right so like disable your feeds
like this is also where like you think
about your phone like do you use your
phone for work maybe get a second phone
have one phone for work or one phone for
you know personal stuff if you use your
phone for work like this is the problem
with having devices that do everything
because the more our devices do
everything the easier it is to slip from
one thing into another
this is a problem for content creators
too because since they do twitter for
professional reasons and they do twitter
for personal reasons it blends one into
the other
and so you're on twitter for like six
hours a day like having fun and
absorbing toxicity from like people on
the internet and you're screwed
so separate things out as much as you
can
there's a set of really interesting
experiments that was done by um
i forget who it is there's a set of
these like experiments that was done on
rats to explore like dystopia and
overcrowding i forget who it is
i think some sir someone so i think he's
like some kind of like noble in england
or something so he did this experiment
where he tried to create a rat utopia
okay and so what he did is he created a
space where he gave the rats as much
food as they wanted as much water as
they wanted
and then he just saw what happened and
basically like the rats like over bred
and then like they started like
degenerating as a society they started
falling apart so they would like eat as
much as they wanted to they started like
breeding like they were like all these
like terrible things happening like uh
rat mothers would have babies and they
would just like abandon them in like the
mess of rats
okay
and so like all kinds of like bad things
were happening
the one set of rats yeah it's calhoun
thank you
the one set of rats that retained their
sanity were the ones that could block
off their space from the mass of rats so
most of the rats would like congregate
in this like courtyard where there was
unlimited food and it was just like a
cesspool it's basically like the
internet
and then there were like some rats that
sort of maintained like healthy family
structures they engaged in good grooming
behaviors they also like took care of
their kids and stuff and those were the
ones that essentially like found corners
of the world and walled themselves off
and like would go out to eat and then
would come back
so even within rats there's this kind of
idea that the ones that could maintain
some kind of boundary were the ones that
were healthy
now big criticism of calhoun's
experiments which i you know i'm falling
into is that people over interpreted the
rat utopia to like human dynamics which
is a little bit unfair
but i think we know from also like
theories of psychology and stuff that
like setting good boundaries like having
good social media hygiene having good
technology hygiene having good
relationship hygiene
setting limits with your technology
usage setting limits with your
narcissistic parents
all of those things can actually be
really really healthy
so learn to set limits learn to set
boundaries use whatever tools you can to
kind of set those boundaries
and that's what you should do if you're
a programmer
what about some some reading in the
first hour is that also a no-go i would
actually steer clear of it if you can
so i would use the first hour of the day
to like cook
eat shower exercise do yoga
plan laundry some kind of should be some
kind of cleaning activity some kind of
exercise just try not to stimulate your
mind at all
don't give it anything to distract it
take care of all the rote stuff you'll
be amazed at how much of a difference it
makes
what if it makes me anxious i don't know
what you're referring to jonathan's but
that's okay
right so life cannot be the avoidance of
anything that makes you know you can't
avoid all the things that make you
anxious
just not gonna work
you